---
layout: default
title: "Text Mining"
date: 2017-03-09
categories:
---

# Week 9: Text Mining

"distant reading" and text analysis
7 uses of computers to understand text
- visualize single texts
- choose features to represent texts
- identify distinctive vocabulary
- find or organize works
- model literary forms or genres
- model social boundaries
- unsupervised modeling (let the computer figure out what the pattern is, rather than train it to id the pattern)

Machine learning and text mining techniques are commonly used to detect patterns in large numbers of documents.
It may be objected that our classification task itself is a trivial case, attempting to confirm a distinction that is all too obvious to be of significant literary interest. (para19)
 it is hardly surprising that male and female authors/characters speak of different things in somewhat different ways. (para31)
 human scholars must still do the work of scrutinizing results and, more importantly, decide how best to develop these tools for humanities research. (para32)

 Mining the Dispatch - Richmond
 Topic modeling uses statistical techniques to categorize individual texts and, perhaps more importantly, to discover categories, topics, and patterns that we might not be aware of in those texts.
 The specific topics are not predetermined by the researcher but instead emerge from the patterns uncovered by the statistical algorithm.
 what counts as 'proof'? do we need data/stats now? or do we rely on written record (letter, newspaper report, sales) that runaways most frequent in certain months or want ads coincide with agricultural season?
 distinguishing the methodological contribution vs. the historical/analytical contribution (new way at same knowledge vs. new knowledge)
