---
layout: post
title: "Week 4: HTML, CSS, and Typography"
date: 2017-01-24
categories:
---
# Week 4: HTML, CSS, and Typography

A few years ago, I took a class in front-end web development, so the introduction to HTML and CSS was review for me. However, I have not used my training since the course, and I have forgotten a lot. The reading, therefore, was a review of what I once knew, rather than what I know now. The section about the placements of block and float was a traumatic reminder of what I struggled with the first time. This is why people use website builders and CMS software.  

As for typography, that is what I love. I am always playing with fonts on my computer. I know the difference between a typeface and a font, but I am not pedantic about it with others. The analogy to a song (typeface) and an MP3 file (font) in the Shay Howe reading was useful. I have always enjoyed reading about typography both because it is an art form and because it is related to the history of the book.
and whatever you do, use smart quotes (and the Oxford comma)
TYpography for Lawyers
letterpress classes
whenever i find a webfont i like, i use the extension What the Font? (WTF?) that tells me what the name of the font is when I hover over text.

form vs substance
content still matters
separate content (html) from style (css)
focus on css typogrpahy gets away from content, sustainability?

Lupin(89)

Print helped establish the figure of the author as the owner of a text, and copyright laws were written in the early eighteenth century to protect the author’s rights to this property. The digital age is riven by battles between those who argue, on the one hand, for the fundamental liberty of data and ideas, and those who hope to protect—sometimes indefinitely—the investment made in publishing and authoring content
change from writer and reader to user
